---
path: "/simple-django-project"
date: "2020-03-10"
title: "simple Django project"
image: ""
author: "Giwan Persaud"
published: false
---

Django serves the back-end for a ReactJS based front-end project. I needed to learn a few things about it to get the back-end running so I can dig into the front-end.
This article sets up a new Django project using docker and docker-compose.

# Architecture

-   Database: A docker container with Postgres
-   Server (back-end): Django installation on Python 3 (separate Docker container)
-   Client (front-end): Vue front-end

# Getting started

To get started we need to setup a new project. Create a new project folder.

```shell
mkdir django-vue
cd !$ # press enter go into the folder

```

There are 3 containers that will eventually be created.

-   Container 1: Postgres Database
-   Container 2: Django back-end service (REST)
-   Container 3: Vue front-end service

# docker-compose basic setup

The following script creates the postgress database and django containers. Create `docker-compose.yml` and paste the following in.

```docker
# docker-compose.yml

version: "3"

services:
  db:
    image: postgres
    environment:
      - POSTGRES_PASSWORD=postgres
  web:
    build: .
    command: python manage.py runserver 0.0.0.0:8000
    volumes:
      - .:/code
    ports:
      - "8000:8000"
    depends_on:
      - db

```

## 1 Database Service: Postgress image

A postgres image is downloaded from docker-hub and started. In production these values should be read from environment variables for better security.

## 2 Backend Service: Django docker file

Create a new Django project with the following docker script.

```docker
FROM python:3
ENV PYTHONUNBUFFERED 1
RUN mkdir /code
WORKDIR /code
COPY requirements.txt /code/
RUN pip install -r requirements.txt
COPY . /code/
```

This downloads a python 3 image from docker-hub and installs the requirements defined in `requirements.txt`. All together this ensures that we have all the dependencies needed to create a new Django project.

Create the requirements file:

```
# requirements.txt
Django>=2.0,<3.0
psycopg2>=2.7,<3.0
```

## Create Django project

Before running all the services in **docker-compose.yml** script, the web project has to have a first run to set it up correctly. Let's run only the **web** part of docker-compose.yml to do that.

docker-compose is used in the next command to run the web project. There the _command_ line is extended to start a new Django project with the name **composeexample**.

```shell
# Actually create Django project
sudo docker-compose run web django-admin startproject composeexample .
```

You should now have a folder named **composeexample** and a file called **manage.py**.

### Configure Postgres instead of SQLite

Django needs to be made aware of the postgres database. Edit the connection settings in `composeexample/settings.py`.

By default Django has a sqlite defined. Change the default to point to postgres instead. Find the **DATABASES** key and replace it with the following settings.

```shell
# composeexample/settings.py
DATABASES = {
    'default': {
        'ENGINE': 'django.db.backends.postgresql',
        'NAME': 'postgres',
        'USER': 'postgres',
        'PASSWORD': 'postgres'
        'HOST': 'db',
        'PORT': 5432,
    }
}
```

NOTE: The key **Password** has been added here which is different from the Django quick start from https://docs.docker.com/compose/django/

If this is not provided **psycopg2** is not able to connect to the database. There are probably other ways in providing this value.

Now we can use docker-compose to start both, the database and web, containers.

```shell
docker-compose up
```

The terminal mentions that the project is at 0.0.0.0:8000 but http://localhost:8000 should avoid any warnings about host restrictions.

# The REST API

# Disclaimer

This post is inspired by the information on https://docs.docker.com/compose/django/
There a project is created with a `docker-compose.yml` file.
The database is pulled from an image `image: postgres`
The Django back-end is installed on a python3 image. The `requirements.txt` file allows for easy installation of the other components using `pip`.
With that, docker-compose can be booted up.

This will be slightly different in that an API is created and a front-end.

# Potential issues

## Postgress username and password

When first setting up the docker-compose project, Postgres is installed using a docker image. This image requires a username password correctly. Alternatively the environment variable `- POSTGRES_HOST_AUTH_METHOD=trust` can be specified. It tells postgres not to enforce a password requirement. This is not safe but can get your project up and running quickly, especially if this is only for demo / testing purposes.

### Example docker-compose.yml file

```yaml
version: "3"

services:
    db:
        environment:
            - POSTGRES_HOST_AUTH_METHOD=trust
        image: postgres
    web:
        environment:
            - POSTGRES_HOST_AUTH_METHOD=trust
        build: .
        command: python manage.py runserver 0.0.0.0:8000
        volumes:
            - .:/code
        ports:
            - "8000:8000"
        depends_on:
            - db
```
